# Git:
Git is a distributed version control system used to track changes in code, collaborate with others and manage project history efficiently.

# Difference between Git and GitHub:
| Feature                  | Git                                       | Git Hub                                                  |
| ------------------------ | ----------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------- |
| Type                     | Version Control System                    | Hosting Platform                                         |
| Purpose                  | Tracks and manages code changes locally   | Stores git repositories online for collaboration         |
| Works without Internet   | Yes (locally on your computer)            | No (requires internet to access)                         |
| Usage                    | Used via command line or Git Tools        | Used via website or Git Hub desktop                      |
| Storage                  | Local Machine                             | Cloud (online service)                                   |
| Example                  | Git commit, git push, git pull            | GitHub repositories like https://github.com/user/project |

## ***What is Version Control System?***
A version control system is software that records changes to files and allows you to revert back to specific version when needed.
***Key Features:***
1. Track changes to files over time.
2. Allows multiple people to collaborate.
3. Manitains a history of edit and version.
4. Help revert to previous versions if needed.

# Types of VCS:
1. ***Local VCS:*** Track changes on a single system.
2. ***Centralized VCS:*** Single Central Server.
3. ***Distributed VCS:*** Every user has full copy of history (eg. Git).

# Git Architecture:
1. ***Repository (Repo):*** The repository in Git is the database where all versions of your project are stored. It contains all the information about the project history, branches, tags etc.
2. ***Working Tree (Directory):*** The current directory where you're actively working changes.
3. ***Index (Staging area):*** Temporary area where changes are added before committing.

# What is Git/ Git lab / Git Hub?
- ***Git:*** Version Control System
- ***Git Lab / Git Hub:*** Source code mangement system / platform used to host git repositories and to share it with others enabling collaborations.

# Git vs Github:
- ***Git:*** The engine that tracks and manages changes to your code.
- ***Github:*** The cloud platform where Git-powered projects are stored and collaborated on.

# Stages of a git file:
Modified, Staged and Committed.
- Modified means that you have changed the file but have not committed it to your database yet.
- Staged means that you have marked a modified file in its current version to go into your next commit snapshot.
- Committed means that the data is safely stored in your local database.

# Download Git:
- ***Windows:*** Download from https://git-scm.com
- ***Linux (Debian/Ubuntu):*** sudo apt install git
- ***macOS (Homebrew):*** brew install git

# Setting up Git:
- $ git --version
- $ git config --global user.name "abc"
- $ git config --global user.email abc@gmail.com
- $ git config --list
- $ git config -h (list of commands)
- $ git config --help (git manual)

# Creating a Repository:
- $ mkdir gitlab (make a directory - repository)
- $ cd gitlab
- $ git init (to initialise git)
- $ nano abc.txt
- $ ls (to list items)
- $ ls -a (to show hidden directory)
- $ git status (to show on which branch are you)
- $ git add . (sends file to staging area)
- $ git commit -m "my initial commit" (sends file to local repo)
- $ git log # view commit history

# Cloning and Pushing:
- $ git clone https://github.com/username/new.git
- $ cd new
- $ ls -la
- $ nano index.py
- $ git add index.py
- $ git commit -m "version-1"
- $ git status
- $ git log
- $ git pull origin main

# Branch and Pull
- $ git branch addition
- $ git branch
- $ git checkout addition
- $ nano index.py
- $ git status
- $ git add -A
- $ git commit -m "version-2"
- $ git push -u origin addition
- $ git branch -a
- $ git pull
- $ git checkout main
- $ git pull origin main
- $ git branch --merged
- $ git branch merge addition
- $ git push origin main
- $ git branch --merged

# Delete a branch:
- $ git branch -d addition//delete branch
- $ git branch -a
